

===== PAGE 1 / 12 =====

Accurate Computation of the Medial Axis of a Polyhedron* 
Tim Culver John Keyser Dinesh Manocha 
Department of Computer Science 
University of North Carolina 
Chapel Hill, NC 27599-3 175 
{culver,keyser,dm} @cs.unc.edu 
http://www.cs.unc.edul-geom/MAT 
Abstract 
We present an accurate and efficient algorithm to compute the in- 
ternal Voronoi region and medial axis of a 3-D polyhedron. It uses 
exact arithmetic and representations for accurate computation of 
the medial axis. The sheets, seams, and junctions of the medial 
axis are represented as trimmed quadric surfaces, algebraic space 
curves, and points with algebraic coordinates, respectively. The al- 
gorithm works by recursively finding neighboring junctions along 
the seam curves. It uses spatial decomposition and linear program- 
ming to speed up the search step. We also present a new algorithm 
for analysis of the topology of an algebraic plane curve, which is 
the core of our medial axis algorithm. To speed up the compu- 
tation, we have designed specialized algorithms for fast computa- 
tion on implicit geometric structures. These include lazy evaluation 
based on multivariate Stiirm sequences, fast resultant computation, 
curve topology analysis, and floating-point filters. The algorithm 
has been implemented and we highlight its performance on a num- 
ber of examples. 
1 Introduction 
The medial axis of a solid object provides useful shape information 
in terms of geometric proximity of its boundary elements. It is a 
skeletal representation that can be formulated as the locus of the 
center of a maximal sphere as it rolls around the object interior. 
The medial axis of an object was first proposed by Blum [5] for 
biological shape measurement. It has also been used for a num- 
ber of other applications, including path planning, finite element 
mesh generation, automated injection molding simulation and fea- 
ture recognition. Many researchers have proposed the medial axis 
transform as an alternate representation to B-rep and CSG in a de- 
sign and interrogation system [25,42,46]. 
The medial axis of a solid is the closure of the locus of all points 
within the solid that have two or more closest points on the bound- 
ary of the solid. When the solid is a polyhedron, the medial axis 
is composed of bisectors of boundary features (vertices, edges, and 
faces). These bisectors are planes and quadric surfaces. The medial 
axis consists of sheets, seams, andjunctions. A sheet is the bisector 
*Supported in part by an Alfred P. Sloan Foundation Fellowship, 
AR0 Contract DAAHO496-I-0257, NSF Career Award CCR-9625217, 
ONR Young Investigator Award (N00014-97-l-0631), Honda, Intel and 
NSF/ARPA Center for Computer Graphics and Scientific Visualization 
Pcm)jssion 10 tnakl: digital or hard copies 01‘all or part Ol‘thiS WN’!~ tbl 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that wpics 
are not made or distri\>uted for profit or commercial a&mtage and that 
cq)ies hear lhis notice ad the l’uli citation on the first page. TO COpY 
othcr\visc, to republish, to post on servers 01’ to rcdistrihutc I(, lists. 
rcqu,rcs prior specific permission andior 3 fee 
Fifth Symposium on Solid Modcling Ann Arbor Ml 
Copyright ACM 1999 I-58 I I3-080-5/99/06...$5.00 
of two boundary elements, and may be represented as a trimmed 
quadric surface. A seam is an algebraic space curve defined by the 
intersection of two or more sheets. A junction point is defined by 
the intersection of three or more sheets. 
The complexity of the medial axis is not fully understood at the 
moment. The total number of sheets, seams, and junctions is, in the 
worst case, R(n’), where n is the total number of faces, edges, and 
vertices in the polyhedron. The current upper bound is O(n3+‘) 
for any positive E. Many polyhedral medial axis algorithms use ei- 
ther a spatial subdivision or some form of discrete representation 
of the surface. Sheehy et al. [40] assert that because of the inher- 
ent complexity of a continuous approach, one has to use some form 
of discretization. However, it is hard to accurately and efficiently 
compute the medial axis based on such a discrete representation. In 
the last few years, a number of authors have proposed computing 
the medial axis based on a tracing approach [ll, 35, 411. Starting 
with a known junction (for instance, a vertex of the polyhedron), 
they trace along its incident seams and discover the adjacent junc- 
tion points. In particular, Sherbrooke et al. [41] have presented the 
first implemented algorithm for computing the medial axis based 
on a continuous representation of the boundary. However, they 
compute numerical solutions of polynomial equations using float- 
ing point arithmetic, and compute piecewise linear approximation 
of the seam curves. The accuracy varies with the step size and the 
tolerances used for computing the junction points. Since the medial 
axis of a polyhedron can be very sensitive to perturbations, it can 
be rather difficult to design an accurate algorithm using finite preci- 
sion arithmetic. For example, figure 14 shows the medial axis of a 
polyhedron which has four junction points very close to each other. 
In practice, it is difficult to accurately compute the medial axis of 
such a polyhedron using finite precision arithmetic. 
The problem of accurate and robust computation using finite 
precision arithmetic is a major open problem in sblid modeling 
[26]. One solution to the precision problem is to use exact arith- 
metic. For example, many algorithms based on exact arithmetic 
have been proposed for reliable computation for boundary evalua- 
tion of boolean combinations of polyhedral models [4,20,26,43]. 
However, medial axis computation involves low-degree nonlinear 
algebraic curves and surfaces. For such problems, it is difficult 
to compute tight bounds on the numerical error generated due to 
floating-point arithmetic. As a result, it is hard to design reliable 
algorithms using tolerance-based approaches. At the same time, 
progress is slow in the application of exact arithmetic to compute 
with nonlinear geometric structures, mainly because exact arith- 
metic is perceived to be impractically slow. 
In this paper, we present an accurate and efficient algorithm to 
compute the internal Voronoi region and medial axis of a 3-D poly- 
hedron. Our overall approach is similar to the 3-D tracing algorithm 
proposed by [35, 11, 411. However, we use exact arithmetic and 
representation for accurate computation of the medial axis. The al- 
gorithm recursively computes the vertices and edges of the medial 
179 


===== PAGE 2 / 12 =====

axis based on seam-tracing. We also present a new curve topology 
evaluation algorithm for reliable tracing of the seams of the medial 
axis. Our contributions include: 
Search algorithm: An accurate and reliable algorithm for 
evaluating all the seams and computing the “first” junction 
point lying on the seam. 
Geometric representations: Efficient and exact representa- 
tions of junction points, seams and sheets of the ms:dial axis. 
Improved efficiency: We use techniques based on spatial de- 
composition and linear programming to speed up the search 
step and avoid enumerating all possible combinations of junc- 
tion points. To speed up arithmetic operations on algebraic 
numbers, we have designed specialized algorithms for fast 
evaluation and computation of the junction points, seams and 
sheets. These include lazy evaluation based on multivariate 
Sti.lrm sequences, fast resultant computations, curv: topology 
evaluation, and floating-point filters. 
Handling Degeneracies: We identify the cases where degen- 
eracies can affect our algorithm, and propose ways to identify 
and resolve them. 
The resulting algorithm has been implemented and we highlight its 
performance on some example polyhedra. Its overall complexity 
is output sensitive and depends on the combinatorial complexity of 
the medial axis. 
Organization: The rest of the paper is organized in the follow- 
ing manner. We survey the previous work in medial axis computa- 
tion and exact arithmetic in section 2. Section 3 gives an overview 
of our algorithm and describes the exact representations Iof the ele- 
ments of the medial axis. In section 4, we describe our new search 
and curve topology analysis algorithms. We present a number of 
techniques to improve the efficiency of our approach in section 5. 
Section 6 discusses degeneracies in the medial axis computation 
and how we handle them. We describe our implementation in Sec- 
tion 7 and highlight its plsrformance on a few polyhedra. 
2 Previous work 
2.1 Medial axis computation 
There is considerable work on medial axis computation in solid 
modeling and computational geometry. The various approaches can 
be classified into two main categories: discrete methods based on 
sampling, and continuous methods that do not rely on the suffi- 
ciency of some sampling. 
Sampling points on tlhe surface: Many authors have computed 
the medial axis using the Voronoi diagram of a set of points located 
on the polyhedron’s surface. Usually the result is an approximation 
to the medial axis, though Sheehy et. al. [4.0] adaptively :refine the 
sampling until all adjacency relationships are revealed. From this, 
the exact medial axis may be constructed. However, the overall 
complexity of this approach is not well understood. 
Spatial Subdivision: Another popular approach is to impose a 
regular grid on space, and compute an approximation to the medial 
axis consisting of a set of cells. The approximation can b’e consid- 
ered an “image” of the medial axis, and does not contain a ‘complete 
description of the adjacenlcy relationships. Among implementations 
of this approach, that of Vleugels and Overmars 1451 is notable in 
that they guarantee correct topology of the approximate axis. Their 
topology-resolution routine subdivides adaptively. Thus, like the 
boundary-discretization method, the complexity is difficult to for- 
mulate in terms of the input size. Hoff et. al. [27] compute an ap- 
proximate Voronoi diagram using graphics hardware. Their method 
is very efficient, scales well to large models, and can be used as a 
heuristic preprocess to speed up an exact method such as the one 
presented here. 
2-D Continuous Algorithms: The classic divide-and-conquer 
algorithm for the two-dimensional problem has been presented b,y 
Lee [33]. Fortune has presented a sweepline algorithm 11211. No 
algorithms are known in the literature that extend these approaches 
to 3-D. lmai has presented an incremental algorithm for 2-D poly- 
gons [28]. Held describes wavefront-propagation algorithms for 
2-D polygons [24] and for convex 3-D polyhedra [23]. 
Incremental 3-D Algorithm: Milenkovic has presented an an 
incremental algorithm for computing the Voronoi region of a poly- 
hedron [35]. It inserts the boundary elements one at a time. At step 
k, the entire generalized Voronoi diagram of the first k sites has 
been constructed. However, we are not aware of any implementa; 
tion of this algorithm. 
3-D Tracing Algorithms: All the practical algorithms for com- 
puting the 3-D medial axis are based on the tracing approach. Start- 
ing from a junction point, a seam emanating from the junction is 
followed. The seam terminates at another junction. Once this point 
is found, the algorithm recursively forks and follows all seams em- 
anating from that junction. The key step is the search for the seam 
terminator. In the two-dimensional medial axis problem, the search 
is limited to smaller and smaller subchains of the polygon. No such 
property holds for the three-dimensional problem; each terminating 
junction is found at the expense of a search of (in the worst case) the 
entire polyhedron. Thus the complexity is proportional to both the 
input size n of the polyhedron and the output size m of the medial 
axis. The algorithm’s worst-case behavior is necessarily at least a 
factor of n larger than optimal O(m) time. A tight upper bound on 
m, the size of the medial axis, is currently not known. It is known 
that m = O(n 3+e) for any E > 0 [2], but we know of no example 
where m is more than O(n’). 
Milenkovic [35] proposed the 3-D tracing algorithm, and dis- 
cusses its complexity. Chiang [1 I] presented an algorithm for corn.- 
puting the medial axis of a planar region bounded by piecewise C’! 
curves. It involves tracing branches using sets of polynomial equa- 
tions. Sherbrooke, Patrikalakis and Brisson [41] have presented a 
variation on the algorithm. They explicitly trace along the seam, 
creating a piecewise-linear approximation to the curve. They ap 
plied their algorithm to generate the medial axis of a numb’er of 
polyhedra. Reddy and Turkiyyah [38] also present a version of 
the tracing algorithm, and compare it to an algorithm based on the: 
Voronoi diagram of a set of points on the boundary. 
Medial Axis of CSG Objects: Dutta and Hoffmann [17, 181 
and Hoffmann [25] have presented algorithms for computing the 
medial axis of CSG objects. Their algorithms compute the paints 
of closest approach between pairs of boundary elements. They have 
also studied exact representation of bisectors arising in medial axis 
computation of CSG objects bounded by planes, quadrics and torii. 
Medial axis to B-rep Conversion: A number of algoriihms 
have been presented in the literature to convert solids from a rep- 
resentation based on the medial axis to a boundary representation 
[6, 11,44,46]. 
2.2 Exact arithmetic in geometric computation 
Exact arithmetic has proven useful in the linear domain. Exact 
arithmetic means that each number is determined and stored to 
whatever precision is necessary. By allowing arbitrary bit lengths 
any rational number can be computed and stored exactly. For lin- 
ear objects, rational numbers are usually all that is required to per- 
form a geometric operation. In the solid modeling community, ex- 
act arithmetic has been used successfully for applications involving 
linear objects (e.g. [20]). Some of the recently developed geomet- 
ric libraries like LEDA and CGAL also provide support for e.xact 
180 

===== PAGE 3 / 12 =====

arithmetic. 
In the nonlinear domain, however, exact arithmetic becomes 
more difficult to apply effectively. This is because computations on 
non-linear objects often require algebraic numbers, which cannot 
be explicitly represented by a finite number of bits. Techniques us- 
ing bit-length estimates may, in the worst case, require bit lengths 
which are exponential with respect to the degree of the algebraic 
functions [ 10,471. One approach to this problem is to use field ex- 
tensions to allow representations of each new number as it is com- 
puted. Many computer algebra systems and symbolic libraries pro- 
vide support for field extensions. However, computing with such 
numbers can be quite expensive. Another approach is to represent 
an algebraic number as the unique root of a polynomial (with ra- 
tional coefficients) within a rational interval. This is similar to the 
idea of interval arithmetic. As long as the interval containing the 
root can be tightened or cut on demand, many useful queries can 
be performed exactly using this representation. In one dimension, 
this can be accomplished through the use of Stiirm sequences. In 
higher dimensions, multivariate Stiirm sequences are used. Milne 
[36] and Pedersen [37] have proposed methods for such computa- 
tions. Keyser et. al. apply these methods to curve intersection prob- 
lems in 2-D [31] and to the problem of CSG boundary evaluation 
[30]. The authors demonstrate that the geometric operations for the 
CSG problem can be computed in rational surfaces using only I-D 
and 2-D St&m sequences. The medial axis problem, in contrast, 
requires the use of either 3-D Stiirm sequences or field extensions. 
3 Algorithm Overview 
Our approach builds on the tracing algorithm proposed by [35], 
[41], and [38]. However, instead of computing a piecewise linear 
approximation, we exactly compute all the components of the me- 
dial axis. Essentially, the algorithm constructs the adjacency graph 
of the medial axis while traversing it. Our terminology is similar to 
that of [41]. 
The input polyhedron consists of faces, edges, and vertices. The 
coordinates of the vertices are represented in terms of rational num- 
bers. The faces, edges, and vertices are collectively called bound- 
ary elements. The medial axis consists of sheets, seams, and junc- 
tions. The sheets correspond to trimmed quadric surfaces. The 
seams are algebraic curves with rational coefficients and the junc- 
tions are points whose coordinates correspond to algebraic numbers 
(of degree at most 8). A sheet is said to be governed by two bound- 
ary elements, a seam by three (or more), and a junction by four (or 
more). We denote the squared distance function associated with a 
point, line, or plane by c&z, y, z), where e stands for the point, 
line, or plane. The squared distance function is a quadratic formula 
in x, y, and z. 
The algorithm starts by finding a single seam. For example, if 
there is a vertex of the polyhedron with three incident edges, all of 
which are convex, then its three incident faces generate a seam. If 
no vertex of the polyhedron is trivalent, a more sophisticated tech- 
nique is used to get the algorithm off the ground with an initial 
seam. This is discussed in section 6.1. 
Each remaining boundary element e in the polyhedron is then 
considered as a potential quadruple (el, e2, es, e) generating a 
junction point on the seam. One seeks the element e4 whose can- 
didate junction p1 comes first along the seam, measured by arc 
length. The ingredients of the search are 
0 the seam governors el, e2, es; 
l the starting point PO, a junction point governed by, say, 
(eo,el,e2,e3); 
l the search direction w, one of the two tangent directions at 
PO. 
The determination of e4 and p1 is based, not on taking tiny steps 
along the seam, but on an accurate topological analysis of the curve. 
The newly-found junction point may be a vertex of the polyhe- 
dron. In this case, the branch of computation finishes, and an un- 
searched seam is taken from a priority queue. Otherwise, the junc- 
tion point is equidistant from (ignoring degeneracies for now) four 
boundary elements (el, e2, es, e4). Assuming the junction point 
has not already been visited, three new seams are inserted in the 
priority queue: those corresponding to (e2, es, e4), (el, es, e4), and 
(el, e2, e4). When the priority queue is empty, the algorithm termi- 
nates. 
For each new seam, the search direction is decided by compar- 
ing the curve tangent to the three bisector surfaces involving the 
discarded element. The correct tangent direction lies on the non- 
discarded side of each of these three surfaces. The medial axis 
transform of an object consists of its medial axis together with a 
radius function, which assigns to each point on the axis the radius 
of the maximal ball at that point. The radius function is constructed 
by composing the parametric form of a sheet, quadratic in s and t, 
with the distance function to either of its governors, a quadratic in 
x, y, and z. The radius function is in general a degree-four expres- 
sion in s and t. 
3.1 Exact Arithmetic 
We assume that the boundary of the polyhedron can be represented 
using rational numbers. However, there is a fundamental limitation 
to the use of exact rational arithmetic in Euclidean geometry: con- 
structions on rational numbers often result in algebraic numbers. 
For an example in the plane, consider the set of points equidis- 
tant from the line y = 0 and the line y = x: the “bisector” of 
these two lines is the union of the lines y = (-1 + fi)z and 
y = (-1 - &)x. Evidently, these lines cannot be described us- 
ing only rational numbers. Their equations have algebraic numbers 
of degree 2, and writing them in “two-point form” does not avoid 
the difficulty, since the origin is the only point on either line with 
rational x and y coordinates. 
Exact arithmetic with these numbers is possible by computing in 
an extended field. In the example above, this amounts to represent- 
ing all numbers as a + bfi, where a and b are rational. However, 
computing in an extended field is significantly more expensive than 
computing over the rationals, especially when the field extension 
grows over the computation. 
As an experiment, we implemented the two-dimensional ana- 
logue of our three-dimensional medial axis algorithm in Mathemat- 
ica, using that system’s facility for algebraic numbers. The algo- 
rithm encounters only numbers of algebraic degree four or less, 
which can always be expressed by radicals. Mathematics represents 
these as symbolic expressions with radicals (no RootOf [ 1 objects 
are necessary). Figure 1 shows the medial axis of a hexagon formed 
by taking the regular hexagon with vertices on the unit circle, and 
Magnified 1015 times 
Figure 1: The medial axis of a near-regular hexagon. The central 
region is highly magnified to reveal its combinatorial structure. 
181 

===== PAGE 4 / 12 =====

perturbing its vertices by rounding to rational numbers, commit- 
ting an absolute error l’ess than 10Vm. Notice that the perturbed 
hexagon still has a degenerate medial axis. 
We have chosen to avoid arithmetic: involving such algebraic 
numbers, choosing instead to design im.plicit geometric structures 
for those objects which cannot be described with rati~onal num- 
bers, and using only rational arithmetic. In the example above, we 
would represent the pair of lines together as the degenerate conic 
-x2 + 22~ + y2 = 0. The choice not to separate the two lines (for 
usually only one is relevant) will complicate our algorithms some- 
what. The expense of dealing with a degree-2 representation for 
a degree-l object is analogous to the expense of dealing with the 
quadratic field extension. 
A seam curve lies on three different sheets; it is represetrted as 
the intersection of any two. An explicit rational parameterization 
of these curves is, in general, impossible; thus they are represented 
in implicit form only. The implicit form G(s, t) = 0 is obtained 
by substituting the parametric form of one surface into the imlplicit 
form of the other. If none of the surfaces has a rational paramet- 
ric form with rational coefficients, an implicit form is obtaiaed by 
projecting the curve onto a plane (see section 4.2.3). Computations 
involving the curve are usually formulated in the (s, t) plane. 
A junction is an algebraic point, represented jointly by 
l a system of three algebraic equations in three variables with 
rational coefficients; 
3.2 Exact geometric representations 
l a three-dimensional box with rational coordinates containing 
exactly one root of the system. 
This section describes our exact representations for the sheets, 
seams, and junctions of the medial axis. The parts are illustrated 
in figure 2. 
A sheet is the bisectlor of two boundary elements. ‘These are 
quadric surfaces, amenable to two different representations: an im- 
plicit form 
F(G Y, 2) = 0 
where F is a polynomial of total degree 2, and a rational parametric 
form 
XC% t) Y(s, t) as, t) -- - - 
W(s., t) ’ W(s, t) ’ W(s, t) > 
An implementation of trivariate Stttrm sequences in exact arith.. 
metic can find a box with a single root, and refine its size arbitrarily. 
(More details on multivariate Sttirm sequences are given in [36].:1 
Reasoning about the point typically involves reasoning about the 
box, while shrinking the box until a query can be answered umm-, 
biguously. A vertex-junction is equidistant from all of its incident. 
edges and faces, and its coordinates are known exactly, so there is. 
no need to associate any of the above structure with such a junction. 
4 The searching algorithm 
where X, Y, 2, and W each are polynomials of total degree 2. The 
implicit form is just the difference of two distance functions, and 
has rational coefficients. The parametric form, however, :may have 
irrational coefficients, depending on the two governors and their 
configuration. Our medial axis algorithm always uses the implicit 
form, and also uses the parametric form whenever its coefficients 
are rational. 
In this section, we enumerate all possible morphologies for bisec- 
tor surfaces and seam curves based on all combinations of gover- 
nors. Based on this classification, three distinct seam-search algo- 
rithms are presented. Each is suited to a different configuration, 
and they may be thought of roughly as evaluation of curves in one- 
dimensional, a two-dimensional, and a three-dimensional space. 
The parametric form i.s computed directly from the governors. 
For instance, the bisector of two skew lines can be parametrized 
by letting s run along one line and t along the other. The point 
at the intersection of the normal plane at s, the normal plane at 
t, and the bisector plane of s and t lies on the bisector surface. 
When s and t are rational, the point on the bisector is rational. This 
plane-intersection technique, presented for rational curves in space 
in [19], worlcs for other bisector types as well. It cannot work, 
however, for the generic line-plane and plane-plane bisectors, since 
they are largely devoid of rational points. 
Internal 
Junction 
Figure 2: The geometric elements of the medial axis 
4.1 Bisector morphology 
In figure 3, we show all of the bisectors that arise in the medial axis 
of a polyhedron. Note that some of the non-generic configurations 
arise in perfectly generic polyhedra. For instance, the bisector of a 
plane and a line in the plane occurs between the Voronoi region of a 
face and that of an adjacent edge. The last column indicates whether 
the coefficients of the parametric form of the surface are rational 
numbers (the implicit form always has rational coefficients). 
Our medial axis algorithm uses exact representations of the bi- 
sector surfaces. An implicit form with rational coefficients is al- 
ways available, but in the indicated cases, the parametric form may 
involve square roots. The consequences of this for our algorithm are 
discussed in section 4.2. In the output, these surfaces can be given 
in parametric form with algebraic coefficients of the form a + It& 
for rational a, b, c, or they can be approximated-by parametric sur- 
faces of the same geometric type with rational or floating-point co- 
efficients with bounded error. 
4.2 Seam morphology 
The ten combinations of boundary elements are listed in figure 4, 
with the most general seam curve type for each combination. The 
analysis method (third column) corresponds to a choice of three al- 
gorithms, described in sections 4.2.1-4.2.3 below. A more detailed 
exposition of seam morphology may be found in [ 131. 
4.2.1 Rational Parametric Curves 
Sorting points along a rational parametric curve is a one- 
dimensional problem. Each candidate junction is represented as 

===== PAGE 5 / 12 =====

Governors Configuration Bisector Coeffs in Q ? 
Point-point Generic Plane Yes 
Point-line Generic Parabolic cylinder (z = 2”) Yes 
Incident Plane Yes 
Point-plane Generic Paraboloid (z = xL + y”) Yes 
Incident Line Yes 
Line-line Generic Saddle surface (z = xL - y’) Yes 
Incident Orthogonal plane pair (z’ + z2 = 0) No 
Parallel Plane Yes 
Line-plane Generic Right circular cone (zL = x2 + yL) No 
Perpendicular Right circular cone Yes 
Parallel Parabolic cylinder Yes 
Line lies on plane Plane Yes 
Plane-plane Generic Orthogonal plane pair No 
Parallel Plane Yes 
Perpendicular Orthogonal plane pair Yes 
Figure 3: The bisectors that arise in the medial axis. 
an algebraic number, in implicit form (a polynomial and a rational 
interval containing exactly one root). 
The coefficients of this parametric form may not be rational. In 
these cases, it is feasible to perform the computation in an exten- 
sion field of the rationals, but we find it more efficient to ignore the 
parametric form, using only the implicit form of the curve. 
4.2.2 Non-rational Curves lying on Rational Surfaces 
In many cases, we are unable to compute a rational parametrization 
of the curve with rational coordinates. However, we sometimes 
have a parametrization in rational numbers of a surface that con- 
tains the curve. In such cases, we form an implicit representation 
of the algebraic curve in the parametric domain of that surface. 
In the cases represented by the first eight rows of 4, at least one 
of the three bisector surfaces admits a rational parametrization with 
rational coefficients. We use that parametric representation to eval- 
uate the seam curve. Using the parametric form of the surface, we 
project the curve back to the (s, t) plane. The topological analy- 
sis algorithm (described in section 4.4) decomposes the curve into 
monotonic segments. For each candidate boundary element, we 
choose the bisector surface associated with one of the seam gover- 
nors. The intersection curve with S is pulled back to the same (s, t) 
domain. Intersections of the seam curve with the candidate-curves 
in (s, t)-space correspond to potential junction points. Each poten- 
tial junction point is located in one of the monotonic boxes. It is 
then a simple matter to order the candidate junctions and find the 
first one along the seam curve. 
Governors 1 Generic seam 1 Analvsis method 
Point-point-point Line ‘4.2.1 
Point-point-line Parabola 4.2.1 
Point-point-plane conic 4.2.1 
Point-line-line Quartic 4.2.2 
Point-line-plane Quartic 4.2.2 
Point-plane-plane Conic 4.2.2 
Line-line-line Quartic 4.2.2 
Line-line-plane Quartic 4.2.2 
Line-plane-plane conic 4.2.3 
Plane-plane-plane Line 4.2.3 
Figure 4: Some curves that arise as seams in the medial axis. 
4.2.3 Non-rational Curves lying on Algebraic Surfaces 
In the last two seam combinations, line-plane-plane and plane- 
plane-plane, the bisector surfaces (cones and plane-pairs) may not 
have rational parametric forms with rational coefficients. Rather 
than performing arithmetic in an extension field, we note that in 
these two cases (including degenerate configurations) the seam 
curve is always a conic or a line, and elect to treat these cases 
with specialized three-dimensional methods. The candidate junc- 
tions are all isolated in (2, y, z)-space using tri-dimensional Stiirm 
sequences. 
For the generic plane-plane-plane case, the equidistant point set 
corresponds to four lines meeting at the intersection of the planes. 
The various slopes of these lines are all, in general, irrational. The 
seam is contained in one of the eight “branches” of this curve, and 
the plane equations of the three governors distinguish points on this 
branch from points on the others. The ordering among the candidate 
junctions is determined by, say, their x-coordinates. 
For the generic line-plane-plane case, the curve consists of two 
non-intersecting tonics lying in perpendicular planes; the planes’ 
various slopes are generally irrational. One conic is the seam, while 
the other is irrelevant. Candidate junctions on the irrelevant conic 
can be culled away by testing against the plane equations of the two 
governing planes. The curve, represented implicitly by the inter- 
section of two bisector surfaces f(z, y, z) = 0, g(x, y, z) = 0, is 
then projected onto the zy-plane by eliminating z from the pair of 
surface equations using the standard Sylvester resultant [14]. Be- 
fore projecting, we transform the system so that eliminating z cor- 
responds to projection onto a plane close to the plane in which the 
conic lies. The projected curve is a quartic in x and y. It is the prod- 
uct of two tonics, but cannot be factored over the rationals. A suit- 
able domain is chosen and the curve topology routine is run on the 
quartic curve. The boxes containing the candidate junctions project 
to hexagons. If the projections overlap, the points are shrunk in 3-D 
and reprojected. Figure 5 shows an example where the seam is an 
ellipse lying in an irrational plane. Not shown, and not part of the 
seam, is a hyperbola in a plane perpendicular to the ellipse’s plane; 
under projection to a rational plane, the hyperbola will appear. 
4.3 Local geometry at Junction Points 
This section addresses the issue of determining the seams that are 
incident to a junction. Consider a junction governed by elements 
{el,..., ek} where k 2 4. In the simplest case, k = 4 and each 
of the three-element subsets of {el , ez, ea, ed} govern a seam. One 
problem is the choice of one of the two tangent directions along the 
183 

===== PAGE 6 / 12 =====

/ 
/ 
-----::. 
_’ 
_:’ 
,:’ 
_:’ 
,... 
-. I’ 
-. 
‘-. 
< -> 
<* 
, 
!’ ,:. 
,/’ ,:’ 
I ,:’ 
\ 
_:’ 
,:’ 
_:’ 
Figure 5: An elliptical seam in a plane with irrational slope 
seam. Another problem is that when k > 4, not all three-element 
subsets actually govern seams, and the non-redundant triples must 
be identified. These two problems are solved by comparing seam 
tangent vectors with bisector tangent planes. 
Junction points can be seen to fall into two categories: internal 
junctions and vertex-junctions. An internal junction q is character- 
ized by: 
l q is equidistant from four or more boundary elements; 
l this distance is positive, and q lies in the interior of the poly- 
hedron; 
l q being equidistant from five or more boundary eb:ments is 
indicative of a truly degenerate situation; 
l the coordinates of q are algebraic numbers of degree at most 
eight. 
A vertex-junction v is characterized by: 
l v coincides with a vertex of the polyhedron; 
l v is equidistant from several boundary elements, but this dis- 
tance is zero; 
l the number of equi’distant boundary elements is quite com- 
monly more than four, as it includes all incident faces and 
(reflex) edges; 
l the coordinates of v are rational by assumption. 
It is clearly advantageous to distinguish these two types of junc- 
tion point in the implementation. It can be argued (see [41]) that the 
connectivity properties of the medial axis make it feasible to avoid 
searching out of vertex-junctions at all-they serve as “sinks” for 
the recursion. Doing so typically removes many degenerate junc- 
tions from consideration. However, the problem of degenerate in- 
terior junctions remains. Degenerate interior junctions are not rare; 
they arise naturally in mo’dels of artificial objects possessing sym- 
metry. 
For any type of junction-interior, vertex, degeneralte, non- 
degenerate-the following predicate decides whether a potential 
incident seam is a part of the medial axis. Let E be a subset of 
the set of junction govemors, and E’ be its complement, so that 
EUE’ = {Q,..., ek}. Let E have at least three elements. For 
each pair (e, e’) where c E E and e’ E E’, let h(e, e’) be the tan- 
gent plane to the bisector surface of e and e’ at the junction point. 
Let w be one of the two tangent vectors to the curve equidistant 
from the elements in E. The seam defined by E and w participates 
in the medial axis if and only if for every pair (e, e’), the vector w, 
compared to h(e, e’), points toward e and away from e’. Note that 
a particular E may not generate a seam, and that if (E, w) does 
generate a seam, then (E, -w) cannot. 
There are (“,) possible seams incident to our vertex, ignoring tb: 
possibility that a seam may be governed by more than three ele- 
ments. Checking a seam requires constructing 3(k - 3) tangent 
planes. Checking all possible seams, then, requires fk” - 3k3 +- 
yk2 - 3k vector-versus-plane checks. For a non-degenerate in- 
terior vertex, we know there is a seam for each E, and it is just a 
matter of choosing which w goes with each one; this requires only 
4 tangent plane checks. For a very degenerate vertex, though, the 
exhaustive method can be expensive. The combinatorial structure 
of the seams incident to a junction point has the structure of ;a cell 
decomposition of the surface of a sphere, and perhaps can be char- 
acterized as some sort of Voronoi diagram, and computed efficiently 
as such. This is an interesting issue for future research. 
Comparison of the vector w to the plane h is performed in (exact 
arithmetic as follows. The seam is represented implicitly in Fh? 
as the intersection of two surfaces. A tangent w may be found 
by crossing the gradients of the two surfaces. The plane h is the 
orthogonal complement of the gradient v of the bisector surface 
d$ (2, y, Z) - dz(z, y, Z) = 0. When the surface is written this way 
(instead of in the opposite order), the gradient points “towards” e! 
so the predicate on w can be evaluated as the sign of w . v. The 
latter expression is the determinant of the three gradient vectors. 
The determinant is expanded symbolically in terms of t, y, and Z, 
and forms a cubic polynomial in those variables. If the rational box 
containing the junction point lies entirely on one side of the zero set 
of this cubic polynomial, then the sign can be evaluated at any of 
the eight comers. 
4.4 Curve Topology Algorithm 
In this section, we present a specialized curve topology algorithm to 
evaluate the seam curves. The algorithm divides an algebraic plane 
curve into segments which are monotonic in both s and t. Such 
a division allows points on the curve to be easily ordered along it. 
Although general algebraic decomposition algorithms (e.g. [3]) can 
be used on this problem (after being modified to handle the “root-in- 
a-box” format), we have developed our own specialized algorithm 
to order points along the seam curve. 
We will present only a high-level description of the algorithm 
here. An example of the output of our algorithm is shown in figure 
6. More details are in [ 131. 
The algorithm we use makes two key assumptions. First, it as- 
sumes that the algebraic plane curve contains no self-intersections 
or other singularities in the region of interest. Although this sig- 
nificantly restricts the class of curves the algorithm can handle, the 
medial axis seam curves meet this requirement. Second, we assume 
that all points on the curve are computed distinctly-that is, their 
containing rational boxes do not overlap. This second requirement 
is met by lazy subdivision of the boxes. 
First, compute all of the turning points of our algebraic plane 
curve, f(s, t) = 0. This is done by finding all common solutions 
between f = 0 and fs = 0, and between f = 0 and ft = 0, 
subscripts denoting partial derivatives. This will isolate all of the 
turning points in s and t, as well as inflection points. Next, we lind 
all of the “edge points,” intersections off = 0 with the boundsuies 
of the region of interest (which is assumed to be rectangular {and 
axis-aligned). 
184 

===== PAGE 7 / 12 =====

The next step is to determine the connections between the tum- 
ing and edge points. The curve between any two of these connected 
points will be monotonic in both s and t. To make these connec- 
tions, the algorithm proceeds by recursively subdividing rectangu- 
lar regions. A region falls into one of the following categories: 
l Contains more than one turning point 
l Contains one turning point and more than two edge points 
l Contains one turning point and exactly two edge points 
0 Contains no turning points 
Treating each of these cases separately, we recurse until all regions 
fall into the last two categories. 
At this point, the curve f = 0 has been divided into a number 
of segments monotonic in both s and t in the region of interest. 
Finally, we subdivide further until the bounding boxes of the curve 
segments do not overlap. 
Figure 6: The output of the curve topology algorithm 
5 Improving the Efficiency 
Our implementation uses a lower level library to perform exact 
computations with algebraic numbers. We refer to them as kernel 
operations. At the top level, the algorithm spends most of its time 
in the search step, typically involving one curve topology invoca- 
tion and the isolation of many candidate junction points in 2-D or 
3-D. 
In this section, we present three sets of techniques that improve 
the efficiency of the overall algorithm. These are: 
l Speeding up the search algorithm using spatial subdivision 
and linear programming. 
l Reducing the number of kernel operations and root computa- 
tions. 
l Fast computation of kernel operations. 
5.1 Speeding up the Search Algorithm 
For 3-D St&m computations, the shrinking of a box around a root 
is cheap compared to the expense of setting up the system. The effi- 
ciency of the searching step is significantly affected by the number 
of candidate elements checked against the seam analysis. Any inex- 
pensive method for rejecting candidate boundary elements without 
examining the potential junction points is likely to speed up the al- 
gorithm. 
We illustrate two methods for reducing the number of bound- 
ary elements considered during the searching step. Neither idea re- 
duces the asymptotic worst-case complexity of the algorithm. Both 
are essentially culling methods, capable of choosing some elements 
which cannot govern certain junctions. 
5.1 .l Spatial Decomposition 
Milenkovic [35] has proposed the following method for speeding 
up the search step. As a preprocess, subdivide space recursively, 
yielding an octree of axis-aligned boxes. A simply-computed pred- 
icate, applied to each box, yields a (hopefully small) superset of the 
set of boundary elements whose Voronoi regions intersect the box. 
The searching step of the medial axis algorithm then proceeds 
as follows, in the cases where the 2-D curve topology step (section 
4.2.2) is required. Similar strategies may be invented for the other 
cases (sections 4.2.1 and 4.2.3). The first 2-D box in the topology 
diagram is considered as the domain of a BCzier surface forming 
part of the bisector surface S. The control points of this Btzier 
surface are easily computed from the parametrization of S, and the 
3-D bounding box of the control points contains the relevant seg- 
ment of the seam curve. The algorithm then descends the octree, 
finding a minimal collection of nodes that cover the seam’s bound- 
ing box. If the desired junction point lies on this first curve segment, 
the boundary element that governs it will be among the union of all 
of the closest-element-supersets of the nodes. Otherwise, the algo- 
rithm moves to the second monotonic section of the seam curve in 
the domain of S and repeats. 
This strategy requires a heuristic for the termination of the pre- 
process. Milenkovic [35] essentially recommends letting it run 
(in breadth-first order, finishing a level entirely before subdividing 
again) until the running time becomes significant compared to the 
time which will be spent in computing the medial axis. 
5.1.2 Linear programming 
An alternate preprocess for speeding up the search algorithm is 
based on linear programming. For each active boundary element, 
the preprocess finds a polytope which is known to contain the 
Voronoi region of the element. Only the structure local to the el- 
ement is examined. Some examples are given in figure ‘7. The 
polytope can be made finite by drawing a bounding box around the 
element and taking half the distance from each of these six planes 
to the corresponding plane of the bounding box of the whole poly- 
hedron. The number of planes defining such a polytope is propor- 
tional to the number of edges around a face or the number of edges 
incident to a vertex-for practical purposes, a constant. 
Next, the algorithm takes each pair of active boundary elements 
and tests their polytopes for mutual intersection. With each ele- 
ment is associated a sorted list of the other elements who are poten- 
tially Voronoi neighbors. When the seam equidistant from elements 
el , e2, es is traced, the desired element e4 must be a Voronoi neigh- 
bor of all three of the seam generators. The algorithm then limits 
its attention to the elements which are on all three lists. 
The preprocessing involves (t) steps, each of which performs a 
linear programming test and a list insertion. The linear program- 
ming test takes constant time in practice, since the polytopes are 
typically defined by fewer than ten planes. The list insertion takes 
185 

===== PAGE 8 / 12 =====

1 I 
1 .I. I _I.I_, 
_..’ I 1 
‘I::,,, , 
I .‘....,, 
I 
~“~.L...........J. ,.‘.“’ 
::I 
y’--( 
r I ! .‘. \ , 
~.........,............,,...................! 
. . . . , . . . . 
.., . . . . . . : 
Figure 7: Polytopes containing the Voronoi regions of (a) a face 
with reflex edges, (b) a reflex edge, (c) a reflex vertex. 
O(logn) time. The overall preprocessing running time is thus 
O(n* log n). The asymptotic running time of the medial axis algo- 
rithm is not increased, since the list-intersection step takes at worst 
O(n) time for each seam traced-the same amount of time that was 
already committed to examining all the other boundary e:lements. 
Thus the preprocessing time of O(n* log n) is asymptotically 
small compared to the worst-case complexity of the medial axis al- 
gorithm, O(n4), and not much greater than the best-case medial 
axis complexity O(n’). Moreover, the constants in the preprocess- 
ing time are much smaller than those in the medial axis implemen- 
tation, since the linear programming step can be programmed in 
floating-point. Fast randomized algorithms for linear programming 
are well known [39], but the standard simplex method is also effec- 
tive. 
5.2 Reducing the number of kernel operations 
Roots of systems are only computed to the precision necessary. Our 
representation is exact, but implicit, and the geometric algorithms 
usually pay attention only to the rational box containing the root. 
At all times, the rational box is shrunk only as much as necessary 
to answer the query. This is a form of “lazy evaluation” of solutions 
to polynomial systems. 
The efficiency of floating-point arithmetic can be Ileveraged 
against the problem of finding roots to systems. While refining 
roots is based on bisectiton, an initial estimate to the root can be 
based on a floating-point approximation. One Stiirm test is exe- 
cuted to verify the correctness of the approximation to within a cer- 
tain precision. In cases where the floating-point solver produces 
a correct answer to within the desired precision, no further St- 
operations are needed. 
Sometimes a root of a system of equations may be isolated by 
projecting the system onto a lower-dimensional space. Given two 
bivariate polynomials, f(s, t) and g(s, t), we can eliminate (using 
a Sylvester resultant) one of the two variables, leaving us with a 
univariate polynomial, say F(s). The roots of F = 0 correspond 
to the s coordinates of the common solutions of f = 0 and g = 0. 
We can examine these projections of each root and count the num- 
ber of roots contained in the projections by using univariate Sttirm 
calculations. If there is only one root in the interval for both the 
s- and t-projections, then we can use the two univariate formula- 
tions instead of the multivariate formulation in order to refine the 
root. Although the switch to a univariate formulation may not be 
possible when the root is known to only a rough precision, as the 
precision is refined, it becomes more likely that a univariate formu- 
lation will suffice, since as the box bounding the root is tightened, 
the projections of that box become smaller and less likely to contain 
the projections of other roots. 
5.3 Speeding up the kernel operations 
Our implementation spends most of its time in the Stiirm sequence 
code, refining roots of systems in two and three dimensions. A 
multivariate St&m sequence computation is executed in two mai-n 
stages. In the elimination stage, a system of many equations i:n 
many unknowns is reduced to a single polynomial, the volum’: 
function. The sequence evaluation stage counts the number of sign 
changes in the Stiirm sequence of the volume function. 
5.3.1 Elimination 
The elimination stage essentially turns a multivariate root-counting 
problem into a univariate root-counting problem. It involves (in 
the trivariate case) adjoining an extra equation u + (cy - ~)(/3 -- 
y)(y - z), substituting in various combinations of rational nurnber:j 
for cy, /I, and y corresponding to the comers of the box, and then 
eliminating 5, y, and z from the resulting system of four equations. 
For two-dimensional systems, the elimination stage is accom- 
plished by means of three Sylvester resultants. The repeated resul- 
tants introduce extra factors into the volume function, but these are 
easily identified and quickly removed. The elimination process is 
quick, and the time is spent mainly in the sequence evaluation stage. 
For three-dimensional systems, repeated use of Sylvester resul.. 
tants can result in extraneous factors. Instead, we use Macaulay’s 
resultant [34], which gives the volume function as the quotient of 
the determinant of a matrix M and the determinant of a sub-matrix 
of M. When the system consists of three quadrics in 2, y, and z.. 
as it does in the worst case for the medial axis problem, M is an 
84 x 84 matrix whose entries are constants or linear polynomials in. 
the variable U. We utilize the sparse representation of the matrix to 
quickly evaluate the determinants. 
The system can be arranged so that the Macaulay denominator 
depends only on the coefficients of the system, and does not contain 
(Y, p, y, or U. The determinant is then a constant, so no polynomial 
division is necessary. One only needs to check the denominator 
matrix for singularity. The denominator is also hidependent of the 
point (cu, ,0, y) in space at which the Stiirm sequence is evaluated, 
so it need be checked only once per system. 
The Macaulay numerator is arranged into block form: 
( 
A B 
C(a,A-f) D(%P,Y) +uI > 
where A and B contain coefficients of the system, and C and D 
depend on the point ((Y, p, y). A is 76 x 76, while D is 8 x 8. 
By performing block Gaussian elimination on this matrix, the bulk 
of the work of taking the determinant of the Macaulay numerator 
is performed before (Y, p, 7 are known. The precomputation Icon- 
sists of finding the LU-decomposition of A and computing IAl and 
A-‘B. Then, for each ((Y, ,0, y), we compute H = D-C.(A-lB) 
and the 8 x 8 symbolic determinant IH + ~11. 
186 

===== PAGE 9 / 12 =====

5.3.2 Sequence evaluation 
Stiirm sequences can be evaluated by constructing the actual se- 
quence of polynomials {f(u), f’(u), fa(~), . . . } where fi = 
GCD(f;-1, fi-a), and counting the sign changes in the sequence 
of constant terms. But the subresultant polynomial remainder se- 
quence algorithm [9] avoids the exponential coefficient growth in 
the polynomial GCD, and tends to be more efficient, especially 
for high-degree polynomials. The subresultant algorithm computes 
the coefficients of the sequence’s polynomials as determinants of 
matrices. For root-counting, we need only the signs of the con- 
stant terms of the polynomials in the sequence. The problem is thus 
reduced to computing the signs of determinants of matrices with 
rational entries, or equivalently, integer entries. 
The determinant-sign problem has been well-studied in compu- 
tational geometry ([7], [8], [12]), but most approaches are efficient 
only for small matrices (order less than 10 and entries of fewer than 
53 bits). We find the fastest general-purpose algorithm to be Gaus- 
sian elimination over a series of finite fields, followed by recon- 
struction in accordance with the Chinese remainder theorem. We 
use the implementation in the software package LiDIA 1221. The 
finite-field algorithm is protected by a floating-point filter, based on 
an idea by James Demmel and implemented using the LAPACK li- 
brary [15]. The filter computes the singular-value decomposition of 
the matrix in double-precision floating-point, extracts the determi- 
nant sign from the decomposition, and examines the singular values 
to decide whether the sign is dependable. The filter runs in about 
one-tenth the time of the Chinese remainder algorithm, and for low- 
degree polynomials, it filters 80-100% of the matrices. 
5.4 Performance of kernel operations 
Figure 8 presents a timing measurement from a representative 3-D 
Sttlnn computation. The program was run on a 4OOMHz Pentium 11 
PC. The time to set up the system includes the time to determine the 
Macaulay denominator and that portion of the Macaulay numerator 
which is not dependent on the evaluation point. This needs to be 
done only one time per system of equations. To count the number 
of roots in a box, 8 comer points are tested. Splitting the box in 
half requires 4 more evaluations; in quarters, 10 more; in eighths, 
19 more. 
Figure 9 presents timing results from the curve topology algo- 
rithm applied to four typical examples. The computer used for these 
timings is based on a 2OOMHz Mips R4400 processor. The cases 
listed are representative curves that arise in the medial axis compu- 
tation. Each of the curves has total degree four. 
6 Handling Degeneracies 
We hold that the degeneracies that arise in the medial axis problem 
are of only a few types, and may be detected and dealt with ex- 
plicitly during the course of the algorithm. This is to be contrasted 
with, for example, the problem of CSG boundary evaluation (see 
[32] for a treatment) in which one may be faced with a great variety 
of degenerate situations, some of which have no simple resolution. 
Only two forms of degeneracy pose a problem to the searching al- 
gorithm: the degenerate junction and the degenerate seam. A sheet 
cannot be equidistant from three boundary elements. If it were, 
two of the elements must have coincident “flats’‘-points, lines, or 
planes-and these two elements’ Voronoi regions will be separated 
by at least one intervening vertex or edge. 
In this section we describe the two ways in which degeneracy 
is manifested in the medial axis problem, and propose means for 
dealing with these situations. 
Figure 8: Timing for 3-D Stiirm operations 
Ex. 1 
Number of 1 
turning points 
Time to find 
turning points (set) 43.0 
(uses 2-D Sttirm) 
Number of 2 
edge points 
Time to find 
edge points (set) 0.1 
(uses 1-D Stiirm) 
Time to run 
topology recursion 0.03 
(uses 1-D Stiirm) 
Ex. 2 Ex. 3 
-t 
3 2 
101 67.7 
---l-- 6 4 
I 
I 
0.18 0.13 
Ex. 4 
2 
69.0 
Figure 9: Timing for curve topology 
6.1 The degenerate junction 
A junction is said to be degenerate when it is equidistant from five 
or more boundary elements. Our algorithm detects degenerate junc- 
tion points by a three-stage process. 
1. Discover, during the searching step, that the interval or box 
containing the starting point overlaps with that of a candidate 
end point, even after the intervals or boxes have been reduced 
to a reasonably small size. 
2. Check whether the four bisector surfaces involved actually 
meet at some point, using a Dixon resultant [ 161. 
3. If so, either further refine the root to the precision recom- 
mended by Canny’s gap theorem [lo], or check for a root of 
the system 
inside the overlap of the boxes. 
The first two steps may be regarded as filters for avoiding step 3 
where possible. 
The algorithm for searching away from a degenerate junction is 
given in full generality in section 4.3. 
6.2 The degenerate seam 
A seam is degenerate when it is governed by four or more bound- 
ary elements. Our algorithm does not need to do extra work to 
discover degenerate seams. Such a seam is analyzed using three of 
its governors, while a fourth governor is necessarily discovered dur- 
ing the search for the ending junction. While attempting to isolate 
a zero-dimensional solution to this system, the algorithm encoun- 
ters a Sttlnn volume function that is identically zero, meaning that 
the solutions set is infinite. When this occurs, the extra governor is 
simply added to the list of seam governors. 
187 

===== PAGE 10 / 12 =====

Figure 10: A simple non-convex polyhedron.
7 Implementation and Performance!
In this section, we describe implementation of our algorithm and
highlight its performance on two polyhedra.
7.1 lmplementation
The kernel operations have been fully implemented in C++. Rou-
tines for root isolation in one, two, and three dimensions, take ad-
vantage of the efficiency techniques described in sections 5.2 and
5.3. The curve topology algorithm is also fully implemented. Our
implementation is based on the data structures for exact arithmetic
in Lidia [22] and also takes advantages of routines from LAPACK
[15]. The current version of the geometric kernel consists of about
20,000 lines of C++ code.
The high-level, non-time-critical part of the system is in pro-
totype stage, and is partially implemented in about 3,000 lines of
Mathematics code. The Mathematics code has not been interfaced
with the C++ implementation. Currently our system has been used
to compute medial axes of small polyhedra composed of up to about
20 faces.
Figure 12: Two example polyhedra. (Only internal junctions are
counted.)
7.2 Results
Figures 10 and 11 show a simple non-convex polyhedron (two tetra-
hedra attached at a face) and its medial axis. The medial surfaces
are parts of planes and cones, and the seams are segments of lines
and ellipses.
A more complex example is given in figures 13 through 16. This
polyhedron is an octagonal box with two opposing slots. The two
non-convex edges are separated by a very small gap. Visualizing the
entire medial axis is difficult. We show a schematic diagram, figure
14, that gives some idea of its geometric complexity. We have: sub-
stituted straight line segments for the seams. Figure 15 magnifies
the schematic in the interesting central region where the non-convex
edges approach each other. Finally, the hyperbolic paraboloid that
is the bisector of these two edges is shown in figure 16. The seams
in the last figure are hyperbolas; the medial axis also contains linear
and elliptical seams. In fact, the elliptical seams in both examples
are treated as quartics, since they lie in planes with irrational coef-
ficients.
8 Conclusions and Future Work
We have presented an accurate algorithm to compute the medial
axis of 3-D polyhedron using exact arithmetic. We have also
highlighted a number of techniques to improve its efficiency, and
demonstrated its performance on a few polyhedra. We are currently
working on a C++ implementation of the higher level routines so as
to develop a complete and automatic medial axis implementation
In our future work, we plan to investigate use of perturbation tech-
niques to handle degeneracies, and to apply the system to complex
polyhedra composed of hundreds of faces.
References
188

===== PAGE 11 / 12 =====

Figure 13: A polyhedron with two non-convex edges coming very
close together.
Figure 14: A schematic of the medial axis, with line segments rep-
resenting junctions.

===== PAGE 12 / 12 =====

IT51 
[=I 
1271 
P81 
1291 
[301 
I311 
~321 
[331 
[341 
[351 
[361 
[371 
D81 
t391 
1401 
E411 
C. M. Hoffmann. How to construct the skeleton of csg ob- 
jects. In A. Bowyer and J. Davenport, editors, Proceedings 
of the Fourth IMA Conference, The Mathematics of-Surfaces, 
University of Bath, UK, September 1990. Oxford University 
Press, New York, 1994. 
C.M. Hoffmann. Geometric and Solid Modeling. Morgan 
Kaufmann, San M,ateo, California, 1989. 
Kenneth E. Hoff III, Tim Culver, John Keyser, Ming Lin, and 
Dines11 Manocha. Fast computation of generalized voronoi 
diagrams using graphics hardware. Technical Report TR99- 
011, University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill, 1999. 
T. Imai. A topolol:y oriented algorithm for the Voronoi dia- 
gram of polygons. In Proc. 8th Canad. Conf Compvt. Geom., 
pages 107-I 12. Carleton University Press, Ottawa, Canada, 
1996. 
J.K. Johnstone. The Sorting of points along an algebraic 
curve. PhD thesis, Cornell University, Department of Com- 
puter Science, 1987. 
J. Keyser, S. Krishnan, and D. Manocha. Efficient and ac- 
curate b-rep genera.tion of low degree sculptured solids using 
exact arithmetic. In ACMLSIGGRAPH Symposium on Solid 
Modeling, pages 4;!-55, 1997. 
John Keyser, Tim Culver, Dinesh Manocha, and Shankar Kr- 
ishnan. Mapc: A library for efficient and exact manipulation 
of algebraic points and curves. In Proc. 15th Annu. ACM Sym- 
pas. Comput. Geom., 1999. 
Shankar Krishnan. Eficient and Accurate Boundary Eval- 
uation Algorithms .for Boolean Combinations of Sculptured 
Solids. PhD thesis, University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill, 
1997. 
D. T. Lee. Medial axis transformation of a planar shape. IEEE 
Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., PAMI-4363-369, 1982. 
ES. Macaulay. On :some formula in elimination. Proceedings 
of London Mathematical Society, 1(33):3-27, May 11902. 
V. Milenkovic. Robust construction of the Voronoi diagram 
of a polyhedron. In Proc. 5th Canad. Conf Comput. Geom., 
pages 473-478, 1993. 
P. S. Milne. On the solutions of a set of polynomial equa- 
tions. In Symbolic and Numerical Computation for Artificial 
Intelligence, pages 89-102, 1992. 
P Pedersen. Multivariate sturm theory. In Proceedings of 
AAECC, pages 318--332. Springer-Verlag, 1991. 
Jayachandra Reddy and George Turkiyyah. Computation of 
3D skeletons using a generalized Delaunay triangulation tech- 
nique. Computer-Aided Design, 27(9):677-694, 1995. 
R. Seidel. Linear programming and convex hulls made easy. 
In Proc. 6th Ann. ACM Conf on Computational Geometry, 
pages 211-215, Berkeley, California, 1990. 
D. J. Sheehy, C. G. Armstrong, and D. J. Robinson. Com- 
puting the medial surface of a solid from a domain Delaunay 
triangulation. In Proc. ACM/IEEE Symp. on Solid A4odeling 
and Applications, may 1995. 
Evan C. Sherbrooke, Nicholas M. Patrikalakis, and E;rik Bris- 
son. Computation of the medial axis transform of 3-D poly- 
hedra. In Solid Modeling, pages 187-199. ACM, 1995. 
~421 
r431 
WI 
1451 
[461 
r471 
V. Srinivasan, L. R. Nackman, J.-M. Tang, and S. N. Meshkat. 
Automatic mesh generation using the symmetric axis trans- 
form of polygonal domains. Proc. IEEE, 80(9):1485-1501, 
September 1992. 
K. Sugihara and M. Iri. A solid modeling system free from 
topological inconsistencies. J. Inf Proc., If: Proc. Sot. of 
Japan, 12(4):380-393, 1989. 
I? J. Vermeer. Medial Axis Transform to Boundary Represen- 
tation Conversion. PhD thesis, CS Dept., Purdue University, 
West Lafayette, Indiana 47907-1398, USA, 1994. 
Jules Vleugels and Mark Overmars. Approximating general., 
ized Voronoi diagrams in any dimension. Technical R’epon: 
UU-CS-1995-14, Department of Computer Science, Utrecht 
University, 1995. 
F. E. Wolter. Cut locus and medial axis in global shape in- 
terrogation and representation. Computer Aided Geometric 
Design, 1992. 
1. Yu. Exact arithmetic solid modeling. PhD thesis, Purdue 
University, 1992. 
190 